translate (#411)
quantum-ods/qmlcourse: qmlcourse/book/linalg/en/vectors.md

(vectors)=
# Векторы

> ## Определение

Reviewer: заголовки надо тоже перевести наверное?

Author: сделано

Автор(ы):

- [Эль-Айясс Дани](http://github.com/dayyass)
- [Пронькин Алексей](http://github.com/alexey-pronkin)

> Vector is a term that has several interpretations: mathematical, geometric, physical, etc. The exact meaning of the term depends on the context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The term ``vector'' has several interpretations: mathematical, geometric, physical, etc. The exact meaning of the term depends on the context.
```

Reviewer 2: что-то тут с кавычками не так

Reviewer: По привычке теховые поставил 🥲

Author: сделал

> Formally, a vector is defined as an element of vector space -- a set on which the operations **addition** and **multiplication of a vector by a number (scalar)** are defined, which must satisfy [8 axioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_space).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Formally, a vector is defined as an element of vector space -- a set with **addition** and **multiplication of a vector by a number (scalar)** operations, which satisfy [8 axioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_space).
```

Author: Более строгий стиль, в оригинале разговорный такой, как и перевелось. Нужно еще мнение исправлять ли на лучшее, тогда и там править ru надо.

Reviewer: Passive voice это не строгий стиль, его просто лучше не использовать, там более что два which в одном предложении

> For simplicity of understanding, let us consider the rectangular (Cartesian) coordinate system in the plane, familiar from school days -- two perpendicular to each other axes $x$ and $y$, selected unit vectors (orthogonal) $\mathbf{e}_1$, $\mathbf{e}_2$ on them and the origin of coordinates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, let us consider the rectangular (Cartesian) coordinate system in the plane, familiar from school days -- two perpendicular axes $x$ and $y$, (orthogonal) unit vectors $\mathbf{e}_1$, $\mathbf{e}_2$ on them and the origin.
```

rectangular это явно что-то не то

Author: Почему? Прямоугольные координаты, вроде слышал такое

Reviewer: Погугли и беру свои слова обратно, просто никогда не встречалось

The vector $\mathbf{a}$ in this coordinate system can be written as follows: $\mathbf{a} = a_1 \mathbf{e}_1 + a_2 \mathbf{e}_2 = \begin{pmatrix} a_1 \\ a_2 \end{pmatrix}$

**Note 1**: Vector coordinates do not uniquely define its position in the plane, but only the position of the vector's end relative to its start. For example, a vector $\begin{pmatrix} 3 \\\ 4 \end{pmatrix}$$ can be drawn either from the origin $\begin{pmatrix} 0 , 0 \end{pmatrix}$ with the end at $\begin{pmatrix} 3 , 4 \end{pmatrix}$, or from an arbitrary point, e.g. $\begin{pmatrix} 1 , 1 \end{pmatrix}$$ with the end at $\begin{pmatrix} 4 , 5 \end{pmatrix}$. Both of these vectors correspond to 3 orthogonal unite vectors on the $x$-axis and 4 on the $y$-axis. Normally, unless otherwise stated, it is assumed that the vector is deferred from the origin.

> **Note 2**: A vector can be represented either as a column vector $\begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \end{pmatrix}$ or as a string vector $\begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \end{pmatrix}$. Hereinafter, by a vector we mean a column vector, unless otherwise stated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note 2**: A vector can be represented either as a column vector $\begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \end{pmatrix}$ or as a row vector $\begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \end{pmatrix}$. Hereinafter, by a vector we mean a column vector, unless otherwise stated.
```

The notion of a vector in the plane can be generalized to 3-dimensional space, and, in general, to $n$-dimensional space (which can no longer be visualized):

$$
\mathbf{a} = a_1 \mathbf{e}_1 + a_2 \mathbf{e}_2 + ... + a_n \mathbf{e}_n = \begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \\ ... \ a_n \end{pmatrix}
$$

> 

Reviewer 2: лишняя строка

## Vector operations

As stated earlier, there are two basic operations on vectors in the formal definition:

- addition:

$$
\mathbf{a} + \mathbf{b} = (a_1 + b_1) \mathbf{e}_1 + (a_2 + b_2) \mathbf{e}_2 + ... + (a_n + b_n) \mathbf{e}_n = \ = \begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \\ ... \ a_n \end{pmatrix} + \begin{pmatrix} b_1 \\ b_2 \\ ... \ b_n \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} a_1 + b_1 \ a_2 + b_2 \\ ... \ a_n + b_n \end{pmatrix}

> $$

Reviewer 2: это не должно быть правее на tab?

> - of multiplying a vector by a number (scalar):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- multiplication of a vector by a number (scalar):
```

$$
\lambda \mathbf{a} = \lambda a_1 \mathbf{e}_1 + \lambda a_2 \mathbf{e}_2 + ... + \lambda a_n \mathbf{e}_n = \lambda \begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \\ ... \ a_n \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} \lambda a_1 \\\ \lambda a_2 \\ ... \ \lambda a_n \end{pmatrix}

> $$

Reviewer 2: tab

The operation of multiplying a vector by a number can be interpreted geometrically as a contraction/extension of a vector.

> Using these two operations, we can count **linear combinations of vectors**: $\alpha_1 \mathbf{a}_1 + \alpha_2 \mathbf{a}_2 + ... + \alpha_n \mathbf{a}_n ,$ where $\mathbf{a}_1, \mathbf{a}_2, ..., \mathbf{a}_n$ are vectors and $\alpha_1, \alpha_2, ..., \alpha_n$ are numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using these two operations, we can define **linear combinations of vectors**: $\alpha_1 \mathbf{a}_1 + \alpha_2 \mathbf{a}_2 + ... + \alpha_n \mathbf{a}_n ,$ where $\mathbf{a}_1, \mathbf{a}_2, ..., \mathbf{a}_n$ are vectors and $\alpha_1, \alpha_2, ..., \alpha_n$ are numbers.
```

## The norm (length) of a vector

In linear algebra, the term **norm** is used to generalize the notion of vector length. It can be said that the notions of length and norm are equivalent.

> Formally the norm is defined as a functional in the vector space satisfying [3 axioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norm_(mathematics)) and mapping elements of this space (vectors) to the set of non-negative real numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Formally the norm is defined as a functional in the vector space satisfying [3 axioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norm_(mathematics)), mapping elements of this space (vectors) to the set of non-negative real numbers.
```

Author: and больше нравится, возможно, запятая все равно нужна.

Reviewer: К чему относится and?

Reviewer 2: к чему пришли в итоге?

Author: поправил

There are many functionals satisfying this definition of norm, but we will consider the most commonly used one -- **Euclidean norm**.

For simplicity, let us consider a vector in the plane. Geometrically, it is a directional segment. The directionality of a vector has no effect on its length, so we can work with it as a segment in the plane and calculate its length using school formulas.

> Note the fact that the vector coordinates correspond to the numbers multiplied by the coordinate axis orthogonal vectors, so the vector length formula is as follows: $\lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert = \sqrt{a_1^2 + a_2^2}$. Accordingly, in general, the formula is as follows: $\lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert = \sqrt{a_1^2 + a_2^2 + ... + a_n^2}$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the vector coordinates correspond to the numbers multiplying coordinate axis orthogonal vectors, so the vector length formula is: $\lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert = \sqrt{a_1^2 + a_2^2}$. Accordingly, in general, the formula is  $\lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert = \sqrt{a_1^2 + a_2^2 + ... + a_n^2}$.
```

Author: Тоже самое, вопрос стиля. Деловой или простой.

Reviewer: Просто слишком громоздко ощущается

## Scalar product

One of the most common operations on two vectors is the so-called **scalar product**, the result of which is a number (scalar) -- hence the name of the operation.

> **Note**: In addition to scalar product there is also [vector product](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Векторное_произведение) over a pair of vectors, the result of which is a vector. There is also [mixed product](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Смешанное_произведение) over a triplet of vectors, the result of which is a number. These operations will not be covered in this course.

Reviewer: ссылки на википедию поправить надо

Author: Спасибо, что заметил! Пропустил.

> Scalar product is used in determining the length of vectors and the angle between them. This operation has two definitions:
> - Algebraic: $ \mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{b} = a_1 b_1 + a_2 b_2 + ... + a_n b_n$
> - geometric: $\mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{b} = \lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert \lVert \mathbf{b} \rVert \cos{\\theta},$ where $\theta$ is the angle between the vectors $\mathbf{a}$ and $\mathbf{b}$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scalar product is used in determining the length of vectors and the angle between them. This operation has two definitions:

- Algebraic: $ \mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{b} = a_1 b_1 + a_2 b_2 + ... + a_n b_n$
- geometric: $\mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{b} = \lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert \lVert \mathbf{b} \rVert \cos{\\theta},$ where $\theta$ is the angle between the vectors $\mathbf{a}$ and $\mathbf{b}$.
```

Reviewer: там и в оригинале поехало

Reviewer 2: тогда и там нужно подправить в идеале

Using both of these definitions, we can derive a formula for calculating the cosine of the angle between the vectors:

$$
\cos{\theta} = \frac{\mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{b}}{\lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert \lVert \mathbf{b} \rVert} = \frac{a_1 b_1 + a_2 b_2 + ... + a_n b_n}{\sqrt{a_1^2 + a_2^2 + ... + a_n^2} \sqrt{b_1^2 + b_2^2 + ... + b_n^2}}
$$

Using this formula we can arrive at one of the main properties of scalar product, which is that **two vectors are perpendicular if and only if their scalar product is 0**: $\mathbf{a} \perp \mathbf{b} \leftrightarrow \cos{\theta} = 0 \leftrightarrow \mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{b} = 0$

The scalar product can be used to calculate the vector norm as follows: $\lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert = \sqrt{\mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{a}}$

## Linear independence

One of the fundamental concepts of linear algebra is **linear dependence/independence**.

> To define this concept, consider a set of several vectors. A set of vectors is **linearly dependent** if there exists such a nonzero linear combination of vectors of this set (at least one element of this combination is not 0) equal to a zero vector (a vector consisting only of 0):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To define this concept, consider a set of several vectors. A set of vectors is **linearly dependent** if there exists nontrivial linear combination of vectors of this set (at least one element of this combination is not 0) equal to a zero vector (a vector consisting only of 0):
```

Author: нужно тогда добавлять, что такое тривиальная линейная комбинация

$$
\lambda_1 \mathbf{a}_1 + \lambda_2 \mathbf{a}_2 + ... + \lambda_m \mathbf{a}_m = \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\\ 0 \ ... \ 0 \end{pmatrix}, \ \exists \lambda_1 \not = {0} \vee \lambda_2 \not = {0} \vee ... \vee \lambda_m \not = {0}
$$

> If a set of vectors is not linearly dependent, that is, there is no nonzero linear combination of vectors of a given set equal to the zero vector, then such a set of vectors is called **linearly independent**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a set of vectors is not linearly dependent, that is, there is no nontrivial linear combination of vectors of a given set equal to the zero vector, then such a set of vectors is called **linearly independent**.
```

Author: Тогда добавлять нужно что такое trivial

Reviewer: В 86 строке

Reviewer 2: что в итоге?

Author: меняем на nontrivial

**Example**:

- A linearly independent set of vectors (only the zero coefficients of a linear combination lead to a zero vector):

$$
\begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\\ 0 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix} \rightarrow 0 \cdot \begin{pmatrix} 1 \ 0 \ 0 \ 0 \end{pmatrix} + 0 \cdot \begin{pmatrix} 0 \ 1 \ 0 \ 0 \end{pmatrix} + 0 \cdot \begin{pmatrix} 0 \ 0 \ 1 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\\ 0 \\\ 0 \end{pmatrix}

> $$

Reviewer 2: tab

> - linearly dependent set of vectors (there are non-zero coefficients of the linear combination that lead to the zero vector):

Reviewer 2: так со строчной или заглавной? кажется что в этом перечислении можно со строчной начинать

Author: Я бы в конце ставил с большой, а в тексте так, как подходит по смыслу. Тут с маленькой оставил

$$
\begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 3 \ 0 \end{pmatrix} \rightarrow 2 \cdot \begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \ 0 \end{pmatrix} + 3 \cdot \begin{pmatrix} 0 \ 1 \ 0 \end{pmatrix} - 1 \cdot\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 3 \ 0 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 0 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}

> $$

Reviewer 2: tab

The following property can be deduced from the definition of linear dependence:
A set of vectors is linearly dependent if and only if one of the elements of that set can be expressed through the remaining elements.

> **Note**: If vectors are treated as any characteristics of objects, then linear dependence can be interpreted as data redundancy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: If vectors represent some characteristics of objects, then linear dependence can be interpreted as data redundancy.
```

> The notion of linear independence introduces the concept of **dimensionality** of a vector space -- it is the maximum number of linearly independent vectors in it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The notion of linear independence introduces the concept of **dimensionality** of a vector space -- the maximum number of linearly independent vectors in it.
```

## Basis

In the formal definition of a vector there are no quantitative interpretations of it, just two operations on vectors and 8 axioms.

> So where do quantitative measurements come from? To make this clear, we need to introduce the concept of **basis**.

Reviewer: это и предыдущее предложения не оч понятны

Author: Как я понял автор изначально хотел донести, что вектор - просто абстракция. Может быть и скоростью, и количеством денег и тд. Типа наши единицы измерения это базисные вектора. Они определяют много чего. Мне как-то так интерпритируется.

A basis is a finite set of vectors in a vector space such that any vector in that space can be uniquely represented as a linear combination of vectors of that set.

> Recall one of the examples above, where we represented a rectangular coordinate system in the plane and unit vectors (orthons) $\mathbf{e}_1$, $\mathbf{e}_2$. $\mathbf{e}_1$ = \begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}, \mathbf{e}_2 = \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix}$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Recall one of the examples above, where we represented a rectangular coordinate system in the plane and unit vectors (orthons) $\mathbf{e}_1$, $\mathbf{e}_2$. $\mathbf{e}_1$ = \begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}, \mathbf{e}_2 = \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix}$.
```

Reviewer: orthons мне кажется не оч употребимое слово

Author: orthons везде заменить надо на unite orthogonal vectors! Пропустил

In this example, we decompose the arbitrary vector $\mathbf{a}$ as follows:

$$
\mathbf{a} = a_1 \mathbf{e}_1 + a_2 \mathbf{e}_2 = a_1 \begin{pmatrix} 1 \0 \end{pmatrix} + a_2 \begin{pmatrix} 0 \1 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} a_1 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} + \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ a_2 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} a_1 \\ a_2 \end{pmatrix}
$$

> It turns out that the orthogonal vectors $\mathbf{e}_1$, $\mathbf{e}_2$ **are the basis of the two-dimensional vector space**, and by linear combination of these vectors we can only represent any vector in this space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It turns out that the orthogonal vectors $\mathbf{e}_1$, $\mathbf{e}_2$ **are the basis of the two-dimensional vector space**, and by linear combination of these vectors we can uniquely represent any vector in this space.
```

The question arises, is this basis unique in two-dimensional space, or not?

> The answer to this question is no. In fact, one can take any two vectors (**almost any**) and they too will be a basis, provided that any vector can be decomposed by their linear combination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The answer to this question is no. In fact, one can take any two vectors (**almost any**) and they will also form a basis, provided that any vector can be decomposed by their linear combination.
```
Предложение немного странное (в оригинале). Любые два вектора базис, если они базис. Я понимаю что автор хотел сказать, но стоит перефразировать

**Example**.

> Suppose we have a vector $\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\\ 3 \end{pmatrix}$ in a basis of unit orthogonal vectors, and we want to decompose it into another basis $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ -3 \end{pmatrix}$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose we have a vector $\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\\ 3 \end{pmatrix}$ in a basis of unit orthogonal vectors, and we want to decompose it in another basis $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ -3 \end{pmatrix}$:
```

Author: сделал

$$
\alpha_1 \begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} + \alpha_2 \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ -3 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} 2 \\3 \end{pmatrix}
$$

From where we can find that $\alpha_1 = -1$, $\alpha_2 = -1$:

$$
-1 \begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} + -1 \begin{pmatrix} 0 \ -3 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} + \begin{pmatrix} 0 \ 3 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 3 \end{pmatrix}
$$

So, vector $\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\\ 3 \end{pmatrix}$$ in the basis of unit orthons is represented as $\begin{pmatrix} -1 \\\ -1 \end{pmatrix}$ in the $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ -3 \end{pmatrix}$.

> But a basis, as said before, not any set of vectors** will do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, as mentioned before, **not any set of vectors**  makes a basis.
```

> For example, through the basis $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} -3 \3 \0 \end{pmatrix}$$ cannot decompose the vector $\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\3 \end{pmatrix}$, so this set of vectors is not a basis.

Reviewer: the basis ... is not a basis. (в оригинале тоже)

Author: убрал в обоих вариантах

What is the fundamental difference between these bases, and can the basis of a two-dimensional space consist of more or fewer vectors than 2, for example?

Linear algebra has an answer to this:

> **Any $n$ linearly independent vectors of $n$-dimensional vector space form the basis of that space.

Reviewer 2: в одну строку не вариант написать, всё равно так и будет в итоге смотреться

Author: добавил строку

> It is because of the linear dependence of the vectors $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} -3 \\\ 0 \end{pmatrix}$$ they can't be the basis of a two-dimensional space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Exactly due to the linear dependence, the vectors $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} -3 \\\ 0 \end{pmatrix}$$ can't be the basis of a two-dimensional space.
```

## What did we learn?

- The definition of a vector
- The operations on vectors
- The vector norm (length)
- The scalar product
- The linear independence

> - The basis

Reviewer 2: со строчной всё и в конце `;`

или как там у них принято, забыл?

Reviewer 3: Кмк, неважно как принято, гдавное чтобы единообразно везде

Author: Вообще важное с заглавной идет и могут быть вообще все заглавные в названиях разделов. ; - можно поставить.

Reviewer 2: вообще смысла мало вижу подобно `What did we learn?` в наших лекциях

Author: Для CEO поиска норм.

(vectors)=
# Vectors

Author(s):

> - [Эль-Айясс Дани](http://github.com/dayyass)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [El-Ayyass Dani](http://github.com/dayyass)
```

Translation:

- [Pronkin Alexey](http://github.com/alexey-pronkin)
- [Evgenii Zheltonozhskii](https://github.com/Randl)
- [Trohimenko Viktor](https://github.com/vtrokhymenko)

## Definition

> The term ``vector`` has several interpretations: mathematical, geometric, physical, etc. The exact meaning of the term depends on the context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The term `vector` has several interpretations: mathematical, geometric, physical, etc. The exact meaning of the term depends on the context.
```

Formally, a vector is defined as an element of vector space -- a set with **addition** and **multiplication of a vector by a number (scalar)** operations, which satisfy [8 axioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_space).

For simplicity of understanding, let us consider the rectangular (Cartesian) coordinate system in the plane, familiar from school days -- two perpendicular to each other axes $x$ and $y$, selected unit vectors (orthogonal) $\mathbf{e}_1$, $\mathbf{e}_2$ on them and the origin of coordinates.

The vector $\mathbf{a}$ in this coordinate system can be written as follows: $\mathbf{a} = a_1 \mathbf{e}_1 + a_2 \mathbf{e}_2 = \begin{pmatrix} a_1 \\ a_2 \end{pmatrix}$

> **Note 1**: Vector coordinates do not uniquely define its position in the plane, but only the position of the vector's end relative to its start. For example, a vector $\begin{pmatrix} 3 \\\ 4 \end{pmatrix}$$ can be drawn either from the origin $\begin{pmatrix} 0 , 0 \end{pmatrix}$ with the end at $\begin{pmatrix} 3 , 4 \end{pmatrix}$, or from an arbitrary point, e.g. $\begin{pmatrix} 1 , 1 \end{pmatrix}$$ with the end at $\begin{pmatrix} 4 , 5 \end{pmatrix}$. Both of these vectors correspond to 3 orthogonal unite vectors on the $x$-axis and 4 on the $y$-axis. Normally, unless otherwise stated, it is assumed that the vector is deferred from the origin.

Reviewer 2: мб вместо «note» лучше «remark», а то 1е у нас иначе выглядит?

Author: Note  - то, что нужно запомнить, записать. Remark - просто дополнение. Короче, от важности инфы можно, наверное, и то, и другое использовать.

Reviewer 2: возможно, точно не уверен; так что если так, то оставляем

**Note 2**: A vector can be represented either as a column vector $\begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \end{pmatrix}$ or as a row vector $\begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \end{pmatrix}$. Hereinafter, by a vector we mean a column vector, unless otherwise stated.

The notion of a vector in the plane can be generalized to 3-dimensional space, and, in general, to $n$-dimensional space (which can no longer be visualized):

$$

>     \mathbf{a} = a_1 \mathbf{e}_1 + a_2 \mathbf{e}_2 + ... + a_n \mathbf{e}_n = \begin{pmatrix} a_1 \ a_2 \\ ... \ a_n \end{pmatrix}

Reviewer 2: можешь эти tab's и в русской версии подредактировать?

Author: а мы табы юзаем или 4 пробела или 2 пробела?

Reviewer 2: 4 вроде как

Author: 4 ок.

Author: сделал.

> (vectors)=

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(vectors_en)=
```

Using both of these definitions, we can derive a formula for calculating the cosine of the angle between the vectors:

$$
    \cos{\theta} = \frac{\mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{b}}{\lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert \lVert \mathbf{b} \rVert} = \frac{a_1 b_1 + a_2 b_2 + ... + a_n b_n}{\sqrt{a_1^2 + a_2^2 + ... + a_n^2} \sqrt{b_1^2 + b_2^2 + ... + b_n^2}}
$$

Using this formula we can arrive at one of the main properties of scalar product, which is that **two vectors are perpendicular if and only if their scalar product is 0**: $\mathbf{a} \perp \mathbf{b} \leftrightarrow \cos{\theta} = 0 \leftrightarrow \mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{b} = 0$

The scalar product can be used to calculate the vector norm as follows: $\lVert \mathbf{a} \rVert = \sqrt{\mathbf{a} \cdot \mathbf{a}}$

## Linear independence

One of the fundamental concepts of linear algebra is **linear dependence/independence**.

To define this concept, consider a set of several vectors. A set of vectors is **linearly dependent** if there exists nontrivial linear combination of vectors of this set (at least one element of this combination is not 0) equal to a zero vector (a vector consisting only of 0):

$$

>     \lambda_1 \mathbf{a}_1 + \lambda_2 \mathbf{a}_2 + ... + \lambda_m \mathbf{a}_m = \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 0 \\ ... \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}, \ \exists \lambda_1 \not = {0} \vee \lambda_2 \not = {0} \vee ... \vee \lambda_m \not = {0}

Author: Я бы оставил более громоздкий вариант, как и в оригинале. Чисто для тех, кто боится нотации через i,j. (Такие люди есть, я преподавал таким)

>     \lambda_1 \mathbf{a}_1 + \lambda_2 \mathbf{a}_2 + ... + \lambda_m \mathbf{a}_m = \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 0 \\ ... \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}, \ \exists \lambda_1 \not = {0} \vee \lambda_2 \not = {0} \vee ... \vee \lambda_m \not = {0}

Reviewer: Эта нотация неверна просто, словами там написано "существует лямда1 равна 0, лямбда 2 равна нулю, ... лямбда n равна нулю". Предикат должен содержать переменную и свойство

>     \lambda_1 \mathbf{a}_1 + \lambda_2 \mathbf{a}_2 + ... + \lambda_m \mathbf{a}_m = \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 0 \\ ... \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}, \ \exists \lambda_1 \not = {0} \vee \lambda_2 \not = {0} \vee ... \vee \lambda_m \not = {0}

Author: тогда поправить на хотя бы одну словами

The answer to this question is no. In fact, one can take any two vectors (**almost any**) and they will also form a basis, provided that any vector can be decomposed by their linear combination.

**Example**.

Suppose we have a vector $\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 3 \end{pmatrix}$ in a basis of unit orthogonal vectors, and we want to decompose it in another basis $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ -3 \end{pmatrix}$:

$$
    \alpha_1 \begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} + \alpha_2 \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ -3 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} 2 \\3 \end{pmatrix}
$$

From where we can find that $\alpha_1 = -1$, $\alpha_2 = -1$:

$$
    -1 \begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} + -1 \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ -3 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} + \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 3 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 3 \end{pmatrix}
$$

So, vector $\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 3 \end{pmatrix}$ in the basis of unit orthogonal vectors is represented as $\begin{pmatrix} -1 \\ -1 \end{pmatrix}$ in the $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ -3 \end{pmatrix}$.

But, as mentioned before, **not any set of vectors**  makes a basis.

> For example, through the set of vectors $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}$, $\begin{pmatrix} -3 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}$ cannot decompose the vector $\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 3 \end{pmatrix}$, so this set of vectors is not a basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the set of vectors $\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}$, $\begin{pmatrix} -3 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}$ cannot decompose the vector $\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 3 \end{pmatrix}$, so this set of vectors is not a basis.
```

> What is the fundamental difference between these bases, and can the basis of a two-dimensional space consist of more or fewer vectors than 2, for example?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is the fundamental difference between these sets, and can the basis of a two-dimensional space consist of more or fewer vectors than 2?
```
